GWEN IFILL: Good
evening. I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight, a deepening mystery:
What brought down a Russian
plane
in Egypt, killing
hundreds on board?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead this
Monday: racial profiling in the
courtroom, how one case taken
to the Supreme Court could
change the process of jury
selection nationwide.
STEPHEN BRIGHT, President and
Senior Counsel, Southern Center
for Human Rights: In the
prosecutor's
files, they had race-coded and
color-coded all the black people
in the list of the jurors.
They had compared the black
jurors against each other.
GWEN IFILL: And Elvis Costello
talks about the moments that
influenced his music and
his new autobiography.
ELVIS COSTELLO, Musician: I am a
fairly decent,
dark-dispositioned person, have
been, but
you can -- it can start to like
it, rather than sort of try to
think, well, yes, I'm
-- I was fine being a skeptic,
but then when you start to
settle for that, then it's not
very good.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: New numbers today
put the enormity of Europe's
migrant surge in stark relief.
The United Nations Refugee
Agency said more than 218,000
people reached the continent
by sea last month. That's
roughly equal to the total for
all of 2014.
Streams of adults and children
kept trekking across Southern
European borders today, and
U.N. officials warned
there's no letup in sight.
ADRIAN EDWARDS, Spokesman,
United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights: We have
to expect this level of arrival
to continue, and that's because
the factors that are causing
people to move
aren't going away.
We are in a period of record
numbers of forced displacement
globally, almost 60 million
people
fleeing conflict, fleeing areas
of instability. It is the new
reality that we all have to
deal with, that this is a
phenomenon that isn't going away
quickly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The U.N.
anticipates some 744,000
migrants will arrive in Europe
for all of
this year. More than half are
from Syria. At least another
3,400 people have died or
disappeared trying
to make the journey.
GWEN IFILL: Communities in
Colorado and North Carolina are
looking for answers, after
weekend
shootings that left five people
dead. In Colorado Springs, on
Saturday, a gunman killed three
people in a neighborhood street,
before police killed him. A
local newspaper reports he'd
complained online
of mind control.
And early yesterday at
Winston-Salem State University,
one student was shot dead and
another was wounded. The
suspect is a former student.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A two-year
bipartisan federal budget deal
has officially become law.
President
Obama signed it today in a brief
ceremony in the Oval Office.
That prevented the government
from defaulting on its debts
tomorrow. The package also
includes $80 billion in new
spending
for defense and
domestic programs.
GWEN IFILL: The president also
stepped up his push for criminal
justice reforms today,
highlighting efforts to help
former inmates reenter society.
In Newark, New Jersey, he
announced he's ordering federal
agencies to ban the box on
criminal
history that appears
on employment forms.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: On many job
applications, there is a box
that
asks if you have criminal
record. If you answer yes, then
a lot of times you're not
getting
a call back. We're going to do
our part in changing this. The
federal government, I believe,
shouldn't use criminal history
to screen out applicants, before
we even look at their
qualifications.
GWEN IFILL: The president said
roughly 70 million Americans
have some kind of criminal
record.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Two people who
served on a papal reform
commission have been arrested
on suspicion they leaked
confidential documents. Vatican
authorities say a Spanish priest
and
Italian laywoman allegedly
passed the information to
journalists.
Pope Francis formed the
now-defunct commission in 2013
in an effort to address the
Vatican's
secretive and complex
financial holdings.
GREG BURKE, Vatican Senior
Adviser: Once again, people are
trying to profit from stolen
documents,
and people with the trust of
Pope Francis have betrayed it,
people that the pope trusted
in. That's hardly the way
to help his mission.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Francis'
predecessor, Pope Benedict,
faced a similar document leak in
2012 that led to the arrest of
his butler and a Vatican
computer technician.
GWEN IFILL: For the first time,
an African-American cleric will
lead the U.S. Episcopal Church.
Presiding Bishop Michael Curry
was installed Sunday. In the
face of dwindling membership,
he urged the nation's two
million Episcopalians to reach
out to those of different racial
and economic backgrounds. Curry
succeeds Katharine Jefferts
Schori, the first woman to serve
in the position.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Wall Street got
the week off to a strong start,
thanks to a rally in health
care and energy stocks. The Dow
Jones industrial average gained
165 points to close near 17830,
putting it back in positive
territory for the year. The
Nasdaq rose more than 70 points,
and the S&P 500 added 24.
GWEN IFILL: And Kansas City is
celebrating today, after the
Royals won their first World
Series championship in 30 years.
The Royals rallied last night to
beat the New York Mets,
7-to-2, in 12 innings. And that
gave them the title four games
to one.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A lot of
celebrating in Kansas City.
GWEN IFILL: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Still to come on
the "NewsHour": questions abound
in the crash of a Russian
airliner; jury selection and
racial discrimination before the
Supreme Court; Jeb Bush tries to
jump-start his campaign,
and much more.
GWEN IFILL: Officials from at
least five countries are
investigating why a Russian
jetliner broke
up in midair and crashed
in Egypt this weekend.
There are many questions
tonight, but little agreement so
far that may have explained what
happened. Wreckage lay strewn
across miles of desert after
Saturday's crash, leaving
a giant mangled puzzle for
Russian and Egyptian
investigators. They're looking
for any clues
to what downed the airliner and
killed 224 people, everyone on
board.
But as a top Russian official at
the scene said yesterday, that
remains far from clear.
VIKTOR SOROCHENKO, Investigator
(through translator): Initial
examination showed that, at the
moment,
we can't exclude any version of
the crash. We will be looking
into all possibilities.
GWEN IFILL: What is known is the
flight took off from the resort
town of Sharm el-Sheikh
bound for Saint Petersburg. It
had reached 31,000 feet,
cruising altitude, when it broke
up over the Sinai Peninsula,
just 23 minutes after takeoff.
Little else has been confirmed,
and conflicting reports
have fed confusion.
In Moscow today, a senior
official with the Russian
airline Metrojet pointed to some
unnamed
external factor.
ALEXANDER SMIRNOV, Metrojet
(through translator): There are
no such faults, like engine
failure,
system failure. There is no such
combination of systems failure
that could lead to a plane
breaking up in the air. The only
possible explanation for a
breakup of the aircraft
in the air could be a certain
impact, some mechanical or
physical impact.
GWEN IFILL: Asked if it was a
terror attack, the official said
only, "Anything is possible."
But the Russian government's
chief aviation regulator said
all such talk is premature.
The Russians also dismissed a
claim that an Islamic State
affiliate brought down the
plane,
saying the group doesn't
have that ability.
Meanwhile, Reuters reported that
initial data from the black box
recorders shows no sign
the plane was hit by a missile.
They didn't rule out sabotage or
even a bomb on board.
That left Russian President
Vladimir Putin to promise Moscow
will get to the bottom of
the mystery.
VLADIMIR PUTIN, Russian
President (through translator):
Without any doubt, everything
has to be done to make sure we
have an objective description of
what happened. We have to know
what happened and to react
in the appropriate way.
GWEN IFILL: But getting an
objective description from
Russian or Egyptian officials
has proved
difficult in previous crashes.
In 1999, an Egypt Air flight
went down off Massachusetts.
A U.S. investigation found the
co-pilot deliberately flew the
plane into the ocean. But
Egypt's
government refused to
accept that finding.
And, last year, Malaysia
Airlines Flight 17 crashed in
Eastern Ukraine. An
international
committee has since determined
that Russian-backed rebels shot
down the plane, a finding that
Moscow rejected.
Meanwhile, bodies from this
latest crash have begun arriving
in Saint Petersburg. The city
is officially in mourning
through tomorrow.
So, what do we know so far?
For more, I'm joined by Alan
Diehl, a former investigator for
the National Transportation
Safety Board, and the author of
"Air Safety Investigators: Using
Science to Save Lives."
Alan Diehl, I want to walk you
through some of the theories we
have heard so far today
and which we heard just now in
that tape. Let's talk first
about the complete midair
collision or failure. What
is the possibility of that?
ALAN DIEHL, Former National
Transportation Safety Board
Investigator: Well, the wreckage
-- the wreckage location pattern
suggests that there was some
kind of inside breakup,
but I don't think this happened
at 31,000 feet, even though it
spread over several miles.
That's a fairly tight pattern,
and there's been report that the
data was streaming as
low as -- down to as low as
5,000 feet. So the problem may
have began at 31,000 feet,
but I believe the aircraft was
relatively intact down to lower
altitudes, perhaps as
low as 5,000 feet.
Now, we do know the tail is
three miles from the main
wreckage and there is other
debris
and bodies scattered in the
area, but I don't think this
aircraft came apart, like, for
example, the Malaysia 17 flight
did when it was hit by a large
missile over Ukraine.
GWEN IFILL: So it's not
consistent with a midair
explosion, at least not at that
height?
ALAN DIEHL: I would
say not, Gwen.
But, of course, having done this
40 years, everything is very
preliminary and I can only
speculate. I think the Egyptians
will do a very thorough job. We
know that, oftentimes,
people say this is like putting
a jigsaw puzzle together. Only,
many times, you don't have
all the pieces.
I think we have got all the
pieces right now. The recorders
were in good shape. The
Egyptians
had analyzed those. I think that
was why they discounted the
missile strike theory. And,
of course, the wreckage is in a
desert area. This is not like
the Ukrainian crash, where
it was scattered over a very
wide area. People were pilfering
things, we think, and maybe
even the rebels were
removing things.
So I think we have got all the
parts of this jigsaw puzzle, but
it's going to take a little
time for all the players to come
together. It's not just the
Russians that are doing
the investigation. We're using
the Egyptians. We know there are
five countries.
GWEN IFILL: Right.
ALAN DIEHL: And particularly
with the French involved, I
think we're going to get to the
bottom of this, and
fairly expeditiously.
GWEN IFILL: You mentioned the
fact that the plane's tail was
some distance away from a
lot of the other wreckage.
There's also -- there were also
reports today that there had
been damage to the plane's
tail some years ago that had
been repaired. What's the
potential for some sort of
weakness
or metal stress and failure
which would have created
something this catastrophic?
ALAN DIEHL: Well, we have seen
this before. In a 747 over
Japan, the worst single aircraft
accident in the history, killed
520 people, the tail came off,
because a -- they're called
tail strikes. The aircraft tail
bumps the ground on takeoff or
landing.
So this is a real possibility.
But, again, Gwen, they have the
physical evidence, and
the Egyptians seem to be doing a
very good job of protecting
that. I have noticed they
have even put fences around the
primary wreckage location.
So, the metallurgists will haul
that tail back into the lab and,
with electron microscopes
and other techniques, establish
whether this repair was done
correctly or whether there
was some sort of metal fatigue
involved or even a catastrophic
failure for some other
reason. I think we will get to
the bottom of this when we have
the evidence.
GWEN IFILL: Well, the black box,
is that essential for us to find
out whether maybe pilot error
could have been involved?
ALAN DIEHL: Absolutely.
And, of course, as many people
have said, everything is still
on the table. Another
thing that was very curious
about this, and, again, these
are initial reports confirmed
I guess by the Egyptians, that
the radar data suggested that
the plane didn't just suddenly
dive out of the sky from 31,000
feet, that it actually entered a
series of undulations
where it climbed and dived --
dove a couple thousand feet
before it made its final plunge
toward the desert.
So, that could -- we have seen
this in the past with these
highly automated aircraft,
where pilots have been confused
and perhaps shut down the wrong
system. The automation
is fed by other sensors. And
sometimes these sensors, like in
the Air France accident in
the South Atlantic, they -- in
essence, they're feeding
erroneous data to the computers
and
the computers do things that
cause the pilots to be confused
and contribute to this.
Now, you can argue that's pilot
error or design error. Take your
pick. The lawyers will sort
all that out in future
years, I guess.
GWEN IFILL: Alan Diehl, aviation
security consultant, thank you
for helping us.
ALAN DIEHL: Thank you, Gwen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now we turn
to the Supreme Court, where
justices heard arguments in a
death penalty case out of
Georgia that deals with race
discrimination in the selection
of jurors.
We begin our coverage of that
case with a version of a report
that originally aired
on the PBS program "Religion
& Ethics Newsweekly."
Correspondent Tim
O'Brien has the story.
TIM O'BRIEN: It was in 1986 in
Rome, Georgia.
Seventy-nine-year-old Queen
White had just
returned home from choir
practice to confront a burglar
who would take her life.
Prosecutors said it was this man
-- Timothy Foster -- 18 years
old at the time.
Down at the Floyd County
Courthouse, over the vehement
objections of defense lawyers,
prosecutors excused all
African-Americans from the jury
pool. Foster would be tried,
convicted, and sentenced to
die by an all-white jury.
The U.S. Supreme Court had ruled
only four months before this
crime was committed that
while lawyers have wide latitude
in selecting juries and may even
excuse some prospective
jurors without having to explain
why, race can never be a factor.
Should it appear that
race is the motive, the attorney
must be able to provide
race-neutral reasons.
STEPHEN BRIGHT, President and
Senior Counsel, Southern Center
for Human Rights: The reasons
given here -- some were false.
They just simply weren't true.
Some were contradictory. In
fact, on their lists of people
who they were definitely going
to strike, the five
African-Americans
were the first five listed. And
there was only one other person
on the list, and it
was a white woman.
TIM O'BRIEN: Stephen Bright runs
the Southern Center for Human
Rights in Atlanta and will
argue Foster's case before the
Supreme Court. Proving jurors
were removed because of their
race can be difficult, but
lawyers at the Center say they
have come up with some
persuasive
new evidence.
STEPHEN BRIGHT: In the
prosecutor's files, they had
listed -- they race-coded and
color-coded
all the black people in
the lists of the jurors.
They had compared the black
jurors against each other in the
notes, saying, "If we have
to accept a black, maybe this
one would be OK," which suggests
the goal was to get rid
of all the blacks. And so it all
points pretty much in one
direction, which is race.
TIM O'BRIEN: A 10-year study of
332 criminal cases in Louisiana
found that when there were
at least three blacks on the
jury, 12 percent of the
defendants were acquitted; the
acquittal
rate rose to 19 percent with
five or more black jurors, and
no one was acquitted in
the study when there were two or
fewer black jurors. In all three
groups, the defendants
were overwhelmingly black.
Kent Scheidegger is legal
director of the Criminal Justice
Legal Foundation, victims'
rights group that supports
capital punishment, and
Scheidegger says the fact that
prosecutors
kept notes on the race of the
jurors doesn't prove racial
discrimination, but rather may
help to refute it.
KENT SCHEIDEGGER, Legal
Director, Criminal Justice Legal
Foundation: The fact that you
keep track of the race of the
jurors as you go through the
process is not at all
suspicious.
In order to defend yourself
against the charges of
discrimination, you have to keep
track.
That's why every time we apply
for a loan, or a job, or school
admission, we're asked
to specify our race, and that's
all they were doing in this
case.
STEPHEN BRIGHT: If all you
wanted was to know information
about the black jurors, you
wouldn't
write things like, "If we have
to accept a black, maybe this
one will be OK."
TIM O'BRIEN: You want his
conviction set aside.
KENT SCHEIDEGGER: Right.
TIM O'BRIEN: But what more than
that? What do you want the court
to say?
STEPHEN BRIGHT: One of the
things that I hope at the very
least will come out of this case
is that the court will require
the reasons given be scrutinized
much more carefully than
they were in this case.
TIM O'BRIEN: Significantly, last
June, two justices formally
urged the court to reconsider
whether the United States is
even capable of administering
capital punishment in a
constitutional
manner.
The justices, Stephen Breyer,
joined by Ruth Bader Ginsburg,
noted that the risk of executing
an innocent person remains
great, that factors such as
race, gender, and geography make
the
death penalty arbitrary, that
the decades-long delays between
sentence and execution defeat
the goals of deterrence and
retribution, and that both death
sentences and actual executions
are becoming increasingly
unusual -- down almost 70
percent in the last 15 years.
STEPHEN BREYER, Associate
Justice, U.S. Supreme Court: I
recognize that we are a court,
not
a legislature, but the matters
that I have discussed are
judicial matters. They concern
the infliction of an unfair,
cruel, and unusual punishment
upon individuals at odds with a
specific constraint that the
Constitution imposes on the
democratic process."
TIM O'BRIEN: The country appears
to be slowly, but inexorably,
moving away from capital
punishment.
If so, the U.S. Supreme Court
may not be too far behind.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The justices also
heard a case looking at the
issue of online privacy.
For more on both cases, we turn
to Marcia Coyle of "The National
Law Journal," who was
at the Supreme Court today.
So, welcome back, Marcia.
MARCIA COYLE, "The National
Law Journal": Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let's talk first
about the all-white jury case.
How important is it that
the lawyers of this accused man,
Timothy Foster, were able to get
ahold of those original notes
made by the prosecutor
back in 1987?
MARCIA COYLE: Well, Judy, I
think how the justices view the
notes is really crucial
to Mr. Foster's chance
of getting a new trial.
If the justices see race
discrimination in those notes,
that is a violation of the 14th
Amendment, and he
will get a new trial.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So tell us about
the arguments before the court
today.
MARCIA COYLE: Sure.
During the arguments, Mr.
Foster's attorney, Steve Bright,
argued that the notes
represented
an arsenal of smoking guns that
were designed clearly to
separate the African-American
prospective
jurors and to treat
them differently.
Justice Kagan asked Georgia's
attorney why this wasn't as
clear violation of the court's
1986 decision as the court was
ever likely to see. And
Georgia's attorney said, well,
really, the notes can be viewed
in two ways. They could be
viewed as the prosecutors'
preparation
to defend against the claim
of racial discrimination.
Justice Breyer said that was
hard to believe because that
reason, he said, was never given
by the prosecutor until the case
actually came to the Supreme
Court. So it appeared
that there were a number of
justices sympathetic to Mr.
Foster's claim.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, the justices
would push back when the lawyers
for the state of Georgia
made that argument?
MARCIA COYLE: That's right.
I should mention, Judy, that
there is a possibility that the
court will not reach the merits
here.
There is a procedural problem
with the case that came up very
late, and the case may have
to go back to the Georgia
Supreme Court for some
clarification.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, what we said
earlier in the program about
there being wider implications
for this case, that really does
on what the -- how the justices
choose to look at this.
MARCIA COYLE: It does
absolutely. It could be narrow,
focused solely on Mr. Foster's
case.
But even if he wins, and it is
narrow, it sends a message, I
think, to other courts
to look at these kinds of claims
very carefully. In 1986, Justice
Thurgood Marshall wrote
separately
in the case to say that the
Batson rule here that was
announced by the court in '86
wasn't
likely to end race
discrimination in jury
selection. The only way to end
it was to eliminate
discretionary jury strikes.
There doesn't seem to be
much sympathy for that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let's talk
now about this other case the
justices heard today.
This had to do with incorrect
information on a search engine
about somebody on the Internet
and whether this constituted
real harm done to this person.
Tell us about the core of
this case.
MARCIA COYLE: OK.
Well, Spokeo is a -- calls
itself a people search engine.
It collects information on
individuals, and that
information is used in credit
reports and for other purposes.
Tom Robins, he searched for his
name on Spokeo, and, frankly,
the information there was a
mess. They got wrong his age,
his marital status, his
education, his employment,
whether
he had children.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just
about everything.
MARCIA COYLE: Just
So, the Fair Credit Reporting
Act imposes a series of
regulatory requirements on
credit
reporting agencies. Congress
passed it to ensure maximum
accuracy in the reporting of
this information. And it
provides limited damages if the
act is violated, either
negligently
or willfully.
Mr. Robins went to court. He
wanted to prove violation. He
wanted to form a class action
of other people who had suffered
similarly. He didn't get very
far because the trial court,
at least, dismissed his case
saying you have to show, under
the Constitution's Article
3, actual harm, actual injury,
concrete injury, and you didn't.
The Ninth Circuit Court of
Appeals reversed, said that just
the violation of the statute
alone is enough for you to have
standing, the right to go into
federal court. That's
the issue before the court. Is
it enough to just find a
violation of the statute, or do
you have to show something more?
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, just quickly,
what were the justices saying
today? What could you
tell from their conversation?
MARCIA COYLE: It appears
they are divided.
You had justices like Justices
Kagan and Sotomayor saying,
look, if somebody disseminates
false
information about me, I would
feel harmed, and if you took a
survey of people, they would
probably feel harmed as well.
That should be enough, isn't it?
Well, Spokeo's attorney
counters, no, you do -- Congress
has to clearly state that it's
supplanting the Constitution's
rule of a concrete injury. Chief
Justice Roberts seemed to agree
with that, saying, we have
legions of cases that require a
concrete injury, not just a
violation of the statute.
So they appeared divided, Judy.
It's a very important case. It's
being closely watched
by the business community, the
tech companies, Internet
service, right.
(CROSSTALK)
MARCIA COYLE: And on the other
side, it's being closely watched
by privacy organizations,
civil rights groups,
consumer groups.
It may affect not only this
statute, the Fair Credit
Reporting Act, but similar laws
that
have an outright violation of a
statute allowing an action for
damages.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Marcia Coyle,
spending much of this day with
the Supreme Court.
MARCIA COYLE: And more to come.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And much more
to come. Thank you, Marcia.
MARCIA COYLE: My pleasure, Judy.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
President Erdogan's quest for
more power in Turkey; how
doomsday
prophecies boost ISIS recruits;
and British musician Elvis
Costello's life and legend.
But, first, Republican campaigns
are making debate demands. Jeb
Bush goes for a reboot.
And Bernie Sanders joins the
ad wars. It's Politics Monday.
As always, I'm joined by Tamara
Keith of NPR and Amy Walter of
The Cook Political Report.
Let's start with the debate over
debates. Why talk about the
issues when you can talk
about the debates?
The latest thing that has
happened is the candidates'
representatives met and they
tried
to come up with a common deal
that they were going to present
to the networks and say,
this is the way these debates
ought to go, no lightning
rounds, no show of hands, that
sort of thing, except that
Donald Trump threw a little
spanner in the works, Amy.
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Yes, what a surprise.
GWEN IFILL: Yes.
AMY WALTER: Donald Trump, I
don't know if you knew he wrote
this book called "The Art
of the Deal," says, I'm going to
negotiate my own deal. I'm not
going to sign on a letter
with 15 other candidates.
And this gets to the heart of
it, right, which is, debates,
doesn't matter, this year, last
year, last cycle, 100 years ago,
debates are very different for
very different candidates.
If you're a front-running
candidate, as Donald Trump is,
as Ben Carson is, you don't like
debates, because it puts the
target right on you, it puts the
focus on you, there is
a lot of pressure on you.
If you are a candidate who is
struggling to get name I.D., if
you're trying to break through,
you love debates, because it may
be the only opportunity you get
in front of the public.
This is why John Kasich's
campaign says, we're not signing
onto this. Carly Fiorina
campaigns
said, we're not signing onto
this. Chris Christie's campaign
said, we're fine with the way
debates
are.
So, there we go.
GWEN IFILL: So, what we had in
this week was a debate over not
-- the debates, but also
over the moderators, which is
not -- also not a brand-new
thing. This has been -- putting
aside for a moment whether CNBC
did the job they could have
done, the moderators are often
the targets.
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: There is a history of
going after the liberal media
elites or going after the
moderator or complaining about
the questions or how much time
you're
getting right in the middle of
the debate and after the debate.
I think what we should talk
about though is that this letter
that that maybe is falling
apart, this effort for campaigns
to negotiate directly with the
networks is actually trying
to take it back to the way it
was in 2012 and 2008, when the
networks would go to the
candidates and say, we would
like to have a debate, let's
talk.
What happened this time is, the
Republican Party, the RNC was
trying to protect the candidates
from the mess that was the
debates in 2012. They were
trying to create a system that
would
protect the candidates. And now
the candidates are saying, this
protection you offered, we
don't know if we like it either.
GWEN IFILL: It should be said
that a lot of the things in this
letter look a lot like
the kind of guarantees that you
get in the general election
debates, whether there are
reverse shots, whether -- this
is not all brand-new. This
question is whether these
guys can all agree.
In the general election debates,
there are just two camps that
have to agree.
AMY WALTER: That's right.
TAMARA KEITH: Right.
GWEN IFILL: I want to ask a
little bit about Jeb Bush. It's
generally agreed, even he says
he didn't do as well as he
could have in this debate.
Let's listen to what he had to
say today on his new reboot. He
went to Tampa, Florida.
JEB BUSH (R), Presidential
Candidate: Take off the suit
coat, ditch the glasses, get
rid of the purple striped tie.
(LAUGHTER)
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JEB BUSH: I like the tie. I like
this tie. It only costs 20
bucks.
(LAUGHTER)
JEB BUSH: Some advice is more
strategic. Nail that zinger, be
angrier, hide your inner wonk.
(LAUGHTER)
JEB BUSH: I can't be
something I'm not.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JEB BUSH: The campaign trail is
littered with candidates
disguised as television critics,
politicians echoing poll-tested
pabulum, but leadership is
something far different.
GWEN IFILL: I especially liked
the lady with the Jeb sticker on
her forehead.
AMY WALTER: That would
be hard to get off.
GWEN IFILL: Well, there was a
lot of -- well, that was
enthusiastic and there was a lot
of enthusiasm in that room. And
that is what he was going for, I
take it.
TAMARA KEITH: Well, and he
had enthusiasm in the room.
Enthusiasm on the Internet, not
so much. You saw there this Jeb
can fix it. It became a
hashtag. They wanted it to be a
hashtag. I don't know that what
the campaign wanted is
what they got, which is people
on the Internet sort of making
fun of Jeb Bush all day. This
is his relaunch and people are
there on Twitter saying,
#JebBushcanfixit with all kinds
of
goofy Photoshops.
GWEN IFILL: Jeb Bush told our
buddy Chuck Todd at NBC over the
weekend that he's a grinder,
which is not quite the same
thing as being a joyful
candidate.
AMY WALTER: Well,
that is very true.
And the problem for Jeb Bush is
not his glasses or his tie or
his suit jacket. It's his last
name, which he can't do anything
about, and it's his message,
which just isn't with the
time that we're in.
Look, this has been a problem
from the very beginning. Voters
have said we don't like
-- Republican voters -- we don't
like the idea of a Bush name.
They don't like the legacy
thing. They think he's part of
this dynasty. So, he's already
working on that.
Then his message -- he says that
his message is, I'm a fixer, I'm
a doer, I have experience.
If you look at the most recent
poll that came out from Pew
Research, they asked Republican
primary voters, do you want
somebody who's been experienced
or do you want somebody who
is new and fresh
and has new ideas?
The experienced, proven
candidate, only 29 percent of
Republicans wanted that; 65
percent
of Republicans said they wanted
somebody new and different. So
he's selling something that
right now voters aren't
saying that they want.
GWEN IFILL: Let's turn to the
Democrats for a moment, because
we have seen Bernie Sanders
hired a pollster.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes.
GWEN IFILL: This is their
outsider. Hired a pollster and
has also put out his first
biographical ad in which he
tells you a little about his
background. And he uses the
"TIME"
magazine cover in which he says,
socialists -- call himself a
socialist.
And he's trying to tell
people what, Tamara?
TAMARA KEITH: First, he is
trying to tell people that he's
something of an unconventional
candidate.
That's what I get from this ad.
The tone is very different from
sort of gauzy bio ads
where you get to know the
candidate. There is sort of at
hyper-speed. This is all you
need to know about 40
years of Bernie Sanders.
You notice the long, lingering
shot on Martin Luther King. He's
definitely sending a signal
there. He was all in with the
civil rights movement. He wants
people to know that. And
then at the end of the ad, there
are these sweeping images of him
surrounded by these
massive crowds and there's the
energy that he's been generating
all over the country,
and also a tag line that says
something like an honest leader,
which, although he isn't
explicitly making a contrast,
certainly, Hillary Clinton has
had some issues in the polls
with
honesty and trustworthy issues.
GWEN IFILL: Is he making an
appeal for Hillary Clinton's
voters, or is he trying to do
what
they always say they are going
to do, which is energize a
brand-new class of voter?
AMY WALTER: No, he needs to
introduce himself to people that
don't know him very well. This
was definitely about going for
those voters that are very
unaware of who Bernie Sanders
is, and specifically voters who
are African-American, voters who
are Latino.
If you noticed, the
introduction, he remarks on the
fact that his parent, his father
was
an immigrant to this country,
the fact that they're trying to
make him a three-dimensional
character. He is a granddad,
he's a father, he's more than
just the caricature we saw
on "Saturday Night Live" who
likes to pound on the podium.
There's much more there.
He knows he needs to broaden his
appear beyond just a white
liberal base. This was trying
to get beyond that in
the Democratic primary.
GWEN IFILL: It's almost like he
takes Hillary Clinton's one
grandchild and multiplies it
by...
TAMARA KEITH: By seven.
GWEN IFILL: By seven, and makes
the point that if you like that
about her, you will
like all of this about me, too.
Is she reacting in any way that
we know or is she just staying
low?
TAMARA KEITH: She's
staying low, I think.
However, there's a new Web ad
where -- or not Web ad, but Web
video on Facebook where
she's talking about her
granddaughter, Charlotte, who
learned how to say grandma.
GWEN IFILL: I get the feeling
we're going to be hearing a lot
about Charlotte as the
campaign goes on.
TAMARA KEITH: It won't
be the last time.
GWEN IFILL: It won't
Tamara Keith, Amy Walter,
thank you both very much.
TAMARA KEITH: Thanks.
AMY WALTER: You're welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We turn now to
Turkey, a nation at the
forefront of the refugee crisis
and
a critical and often problematic
partner to the U.S. in the
American-led coalition against
the Islamic State.
The country has been in
political limbo since June's
election there failed to produce
a
clear-cut winner. That all
changed last night, when
President Recep Erdogan's party
emerged
victorious in Sunday's snap
election. Supporters say the win
is a return to stability.
But, as special correspondent
Malcolm Brabant reports, others
fear the results are a giant
step towards autocratic rule.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The call to
prayer rang out around Central
Istanbul today, reinforcing
the message that after five
months of political instability,
Turkey is now back on a familiar
track, under the firm control of
the Islamic A.K., or A.K. Party,
founded by president
Recep Tayyip Erdogan.
Political analysts here believe
most Turks rejected the
opposition parties because they
needed a sense of security
during a dangerous time. But not
everyone in Taksim Square was
happy.
MAN: Like I said, personally,
I'm upset about what is going
on. You don't have to be asking
normal citizens. I think
everybody knows about how
democracy goes on here in
Turkey, so many
prisoners. You can't say what
you're thinking, exactly. I
don't feel free. I'm also a bit
scared.
WOMAN (through translator): I
think our people selected
stability once again. And I
think
they decided well with a
single-party government again.
MALCOLM BRABANT: As the A.K.
Party celebrated last night, the
prime minister urged his
parliamentarians
to employ humility, instead of
triumphalism. President Erdogan
wasn't giving much away
about his intentions today.
RECEP TAYYIP ERDOGAN, Turkish
President (through translator):
The national will manifested
itself on November 1 in favor of
stability. After the short-term
developments, the national
will decided that there is no
way out other than choosing
stability. They decided in favor
of stability. I hope this
outcome will be good for our
people and our country.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But
international observers
complained about election
irregularities.
Representing European election
monitors, Andreas Gross urged
President Erdogan to end
Turkey's
divisions and to be
less authoritarian.
ANDREAS GROSS, European Election
Monitor: Fear is the enemy of
democracy, enemy of free
choice. And in this sense, we
are disappointed of the quality
of the process. And in light
of this, it is even more vital
that this is an appeal that the
president works in the
future for a more inclusive
political process.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Leading Turkish
political analyst Cengiz Aktar
believes President Erdogan
is now on course to get a
referendum aimed at boosting his
executive powers.
CENGIZ AKTAR, Political Analyst:
If this man has a role model in
the world, it's probably
Vladimir Putin. So I think he
will run by decree. He will just
use the Parliament when
he needs to use the Parliament,
and he will put in practice his
ideas and ideology that
he thinks is the right thing for
this country and for the people
of this country, without
asking anything to anyone.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But Etyen
Mahcupyan, a senior adviser to
the prime minister, predicts
that
Turkish Muslims will not
tolerate President Erdogan
emulating his Russian
counterpart,
and believes their relationship
with the A.K. Party is key to
Turkey's future success.
ETYEN MAHCUPYAN, Senior Adviser:
If democracy is right for this
country, it will arrive
through the hands of the Islamic
community, the conservative
community. And as long as
this party alone can talk to
them, can carry their voices and
so on and so forth, it will
be through our party.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Political
analysts expect to see a new
self-confidence from the Turkish
government. They don't expect
any change in the policy
regarding refugees. The A.K.
Party
will continue to press ahead
with efforts to join the
European Union.
As far as the United States is
concerned, they say that the
most important thing is
that Turkey will insist on
having a big say in what happens
in Syria.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant in Istanbul.
GWEN IFILL: Now another addition
to the "NewsHour" Bookshelf.
As the U.S. steps up military
efforts against the Islamic
State in Syria, a question
persists:
How did this extremely brutal
group emerge so rapidly? A new
book offers one answer,
"The ISIS Apocalypse: The
History, Strategy, and Doomsday
Vision of the Islamic State."
Its author is early Islam
historian William McCants,
senior fellow and project
director
at the Brookings Institution.
He spoke recently with chief
foreign affairs correspondent
Margaret Warner.
MARGARET WARNER: Will
McCants, welcome.
You suggest right at the
beginning of the book that it
was triggered in a way by a
question
your father asked, which is, why
do they do that? Is that what
this book is, an answer
for that?
WILLIAM MCCANTS, Author, "The
ISIS Apocalypse: The History,
Strategy, and Doomsday Vision
of the Islamic State":
That's right.
My dad is 85 years old. And like
most Americans, he watches the
news and he can't understand
why a group like the Islamic
State is so brutal to people and
why they would be so extreme
in their actions. So, it's for
him that I -- and people like
him that I wrote this book.
MARGARET WARNER: So, you, as
your title says, chalk that up
to its apocalyptic vision. What
is that vision?
WILLIAM MCCANTS: That's right.
The Islamic State believes that
the end of the world is
approaching and it believes that
it has also reestablished God's
kingdom on Earth. And that
kingdom is going to wage an
epic battle against the infidels
before it all comes tumbling
down.
MARGARET WARNER: And that drives
them, what, with a special sense
of urgency?
WILLIAM MCCANTS: Gives them a
special sense of urgency, but
also has been terrific for
recruiting.
They have been able to attract a
lot of foreigners to their cause
and many of the foreigners,
based on interviews with
journalists, say that the main
reason they're there is because
they believe that the world is
coming to an end and the Islamic
State is a fulfillment
of prophecy. So, they're
traveling there to do their bit.
MARGARET WARNER: Now, many of
these recruits, at least --
especially the Westerners, those
I have reported on, they aren't
religious at all. And they
certainly aren't scholars
of Islam. Why would this
prophecy of the end of days be
appealing to them?
WILLIAM MCCANTS: No, many of
them don't know much about
Islamic scripture. And they are
not particularly religious, many
of them, but they are
intoxicated by the idea of
fighting
an end-times battle and
absolving their own sins.
The first crusaders that set out
to take over Jerusalem were also
fired by the same sort
of visions, even though many of
them weren't very religious.
MARGARET WARNER: Now, how does
the really horrific brutality
and way they publicize
it in these videos, how does
that play a part, or why is that
part of it?
WILLIAM MCCANTS: For many
apocalyptic groups throughout
history, not just Muslim ones,
the apocalypse can be excuse for
very extreme violence, because
the normal rules don't apply.
So, in a number of these videos
of members committing horrible
acts, they will make reference
to the fact that they are
fulfilling prophecy.
MARGARET WARNER: They even talk
about a small town in Syria near
the Turkish border named
Dabiq?
WILLIAM MCCANTS: That's right.
MARGARET WARNER: What is that?
WILLIAM MCCANTS: Yes. There's a
tiny town just north of Aleppo
that one Muslim prophecy
says will be the site of a
massive battle with the
infidels.
And so the Islamic State last
year made sure to take over the
town in preparation for that
battle.
MARGARET WARNER: You also say
that the turmoil in the Middle
East over the last 15 years
has given evidence at, least to
the leaders of the Islamic
State, that the end of the
days is near.
WILLIAM MCCANTS: That's right.
Extreme violence, political
upheaval invites this kind of
apocalyptic framework, where
more stable times wouldn't. It
also provides the opportunity
for groups like the Islamic
State to take advantage of the
chaos in order to try and
fulfill prophecy.
MARGARET WARNER: And so both
invasions by the United States
would count as part of that,
civil and sectarian conflicts,
like we're seeing in Syria,
Iraq?
WILLIAM MCCANTS: That's right.
That's right. And particularly
Sunni Muslims, apocalyptic
thinking became much more
popular after 2003, when the
U.S. invaded Iraq.
MARGARET WARNER: Now, you have
translated a lot of original
documents both from the
Koran and from the Prophet
Mohammed's prophecies.
To what degree is this
apocalyptic vision really
supported by those?
WILLIAM MCCANTS: There are some
prophecies mentioned in the
Koran, but mainly these come
from statements that are
attributed to Mohammed, which
many conservative Muslims regard
as
a scripture second
only to the Koran.
So, early Islamic scripture is
filled with these kind of
prophecies.
MARGARET WARNER: And they
really are at the heart of it?
WILLIAM MCCANTS: They are. And
for many Muslims, they are very
important, particularly when
there is political upheaval in
the countries in which they
live.
MARGARET WARNER: And then what
about the leader of this Islamic
State, the caliph, he's
proclaimed
himself, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi?
Did you get a sense of whether
he really believes this
or is it just a ticket to power?
WILLIAM MCCANTS: He is a
religious scholar by training.
From his early days, his
nickname
was the believer, because he had
a very strict type of piety. And
there has been nothing
that's come to light so far to
suggest that he's using these
prophecies cynically.
MARGARET WARNER: This represents
really a sea change. I think you
called it a changing
of the guards in the
jihadist movement.
WILLIAM MCCANTS: That's right.
Al-Qaida used to downplay these
kind of prophecies. And they
would put off state -- the kind
of
state-building that the Islamic
State is engaged in. The Islamic
State plays up these prophecies
and uses them to motivate
fighters for the exact task of
state building. And given the
political instability in the
Arab world, I think we are going
to see much more of it.
MARGARET WARNER: So
there's no going back?
WILLIAM MCCANTS: No, there's no
going back. It's an idea whose
time has come for the jihadist
movement.
MARGARET WARNER: Then what
recourse is there for the U.S.
and its allies?
WILLIAM MCCANTS: They have to
contain the problem. It's not
going to be possible to
put this genie back
in the bottle.
MARGARET WARNER: And what would
it take to resolve these
sectarian conflicts?
WILLIAM MCCANTS: Well,
fundamentally, it's going to
require some tough political
deals.
The disenfranchisement of the
Sunnis is what the Islamic State
thrives on. And until those
Sunnis are brought back into the
political process, groups like
the Islamic State will
continue to thrive.
MARGARET WARNER: And the U.S.
will play very little role in
that?
WILLIAM MCCANTS: That's right,
because most of the Americans'
partners in the regions
have higher priorities than the
destruction of the Islamic
State.
MARGARET WARNER: Will
McCants, thank you.
WILLIAM MCCANTS: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight,
a most unusual autobiography
about a life in rock 'n' roll
and beyond.
Elvis Costello talks about his
new memoir, "Unfaithful Music
and Disappearing Ink."
Jeffrey Brown has the
story from New York.
JEFFREY BROWN: Early in his new
memoir, Elvis Costello writes
about his father, Ross McManus,
trying to make it in Liverpool
as a bebop jazz musician.
ELVIS COSTELLO, Musician: I have
a clipping that I reproduce in
the book where it says,
the Ross McManus Quintet direct
from their engagements in Paris
and London. And at that
time, I don't think they had
actually played across the...
(CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN: Never
happened, right?
ELVIS COSTELLO: No, they had
never been out of the
neighborhood.
JEFFREY BROWN: So, he was
sort of making it up.
ELVIS COSTELLO: Well, that was
good. That was the dream of it,
to do that.
JEFFREY BROWN: The father would
go on to a successful singing
career with one of Britain's
leading dance bands, doing cover
songs of popular music, even
folk songs like "If I
Had a Hammer."
The son, born Declan MacManus,
would become one of the leading
rockers of his time, emerging
in the late 1970s as a kind of
nerdy-looking, language-loving,
angry young songwriter and
singer.
He was pegged back then as part
of the folk scene. But when we
talked recently at New
York's famous Village Vanguard,
a nod to his jazz-loving dad,
recently, Costello said he
never saw himself that way.
ELVIS COSTELLO: I think, early
on, I had worked out that if I
adopted a sort of less
cooperative
personality when speaking to
people, they would leave me
alone. And I would just be
able to get...
(CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN:
Simple as that, huh?
ELVIS COSTELLO: I just created
this character accidentally. And
then I realized, hey, that
works.
(CROSSTALK)
ELVIS COSTELLO: It gets kind of
tedious to kind of keep it up,
because then you can never
drop it down. You can never drop
it down and just laugh, you
know?
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, that's what
I'm wondering. But you think of
it as a character?
(CROSSTALK)
ELVIS COSTELLO: Not in a
calculated way. It just happened
spontaneously. And then you
see the effect and then you
play into the effect. But...
JEFFREY BROWN: The book sort of
tells the story of you becoming
more yourself or allowing
yourself to be less of that
character and more who you
actually are?
ELVIS COSTELLO: I think it's a
process of, you know, adventure,
misadventure, you know,
failure personally, and then
realizing that you can't keep
doing -- you know, it's not
like I'm denying the nature of
the songs, but just carrying on
like that was just tiring.
It's just like you run out of
drinks to drink, you know, that
kind of thing? And then there
were just other songs to sing
and other lives to live.
JEFFREY BROWN: Over the years,
other songs came, many of them,
as Costello took on a
wide range of other styles of
music, an album with Burt
Bacharach, one with a string
quartet,
and much more to this day.
But it began, he writes, at home
as a child, when his father was
passing on records that
he was listening to for his own
work and both parents had
eclectic tastes.
ELVIS COSTELLO: I didn't study
any French, so I didn't know the
word genre. You know,
so I didn't have sort of a sense
of there being different kinds
of music.
And my dad would get passions
for Bach and we would listen all
to the Bach passion, and
then the Clancy Brothers and
Irish music. And my mother loved
singers like Sinatra and
Ella Fitzgerald. So I heard all
those songs, as well as all the
1960s pop music that came
out, whether it would be from
England like the Beatles or from
America like Motown.
And it was all just flowing
through. And it didn't seem like
you had to choose.
JEFFREY BROWN: What about when
it came to performing and
putting yourself forward?
There's
the -- and even taking a new
name, right, and not only just a
new name, but a very big
name, Elvis.
ELVIS COSTELLO: Yes.
Well, I just felt, well, my
family name, McManus, is hard to
say on the telephone. It didn't
look very attractive written
down. It sort of suggested a guy
in a cable-knit sweater
singing waling songs. And so I
wanted something a little
groovier.
So I had adopted that part. And
in addition, my father had made
records in the '60s under
assumed names, because he had
made money on the side from his
contracted gig as a dance
band singer.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
ELVIS COSTELLO: He had made
records under the names Frank
Bacon and the Baconeers and
Hal Prince and the Layabouts.
(CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN: So, you're used
to taking on any names, but...
(CROSSTALK)
ELVIS COSTELLO: Seemed like, in
the noble showbiz, tradition, if
you're going to, you
know -- I mean, you know.
JEFFREY BROWN: The memoir moves
back and forth through time,
connecting, as Costello told
me, moments, experiences,
revelations.
But it's all there, the way up
working with many of today's
great musicians and the many
downs, broken marriages, too
much drinking, a loss of control
over what he wanted to be
doing.
ELVIS COSTELLO: You can be
addicted to misery the same way
as you can be addicted to drugs.
(CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN: And you felt
yourself addicted to misery in a
sense?
ELVIS COSTELLO: I am a fairly
decent, dark-dispositioned
person, have been, but you can
-- it can start
to like it, rather than sort of
try to think, well, yes, I'm --
I was fine being a skeptic,
but then when you start to
settle for that, then it's not
very good.
JEFFREY BROWN: But he also sings
of happier times, including his
marriage to the jazz
singer Diana Krall. The two have
twin 8-year-old sons. And he
brings the story full circle
with the death of his
father four years ago.
ELVIS COSTELLO: His passing was
poignant, in the way that I
related it, because he had
been a very vivid personality,
and the nature of his demise was
through Parkinson's and
the dementia that came with
that, erasing his senses little
by little, of which music
was about the last companion,
which was very, very moving for
me.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes. Was that
part of the impetus, though, for
you to write this book?
ELVIS COSTELLO: Well, I think
the impetus to get it finished
in a form that you now
see it.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
ELVIS COSTELLO: Certainly,
because I was able to talk with
him with clarity in the -- as
I saw him shutting down.
And then, at the end, I felt
like I had the responsibility
while it was still clear in
my mind to get it on the page
for anybody that -- anybody that
in -- and anybody interested
in how I came to do what I did.
But for that -- even if I had
never published it, I would
have written it for my sons, you
know, because I am the last,
best witness.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right,
"Unfaithful Music and
Disappearing Ink."
Elvis Costello, thank you.
ELVIS COSTELLO: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
online: It has one of the
world's lowest Internet
penetration
rates, but now Cuba is making it
a little easier for people to
send something as simple
as an e-mail.
But how will 35 new Wi-Fi hot
spots in parks and schools
across the country meet demand
in a country of 11 million? Read
how Havana is addressing
connectivity in its more open
world. That story is on our
home page, PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And tune in later
tonight on "Charlie Rose":
Hewlett-Packard CEO Meg Whitman
and author Charlie Savage on
President Obama's power wars,
his new book.
And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
On Tuesday, we will talk with
the woman in charge of the
U.N.'s upcoming summit on
climate
change.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening. For all of us
here at the "PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.